So what is an encounter?
The definition of an encounter commonly used for HR records
comes from the Health Level 7 International Organization,
which sets the international standards for health care data.
As the definition states,
it is essentially an interaction between a patient and a health care professional.
It usually refers to doctor visits and hospital stays.
Now that we know what encounter is and also where it fits relative to other EHR levels,
we are ready to go over how to convert a dataset from the line level to encounter level.
So let's go through this notebook to see how to do this.
However, before we do that,
let's just talk you through the code that was used to make a synthetic dataset.
Because of issues around using datasets with PHI,
I created synthetic data set that we will use throughout
the course that can show you the general structure of how EHR claims look like.
There is a bit more complexity with the actual dataset.
But for the purposes of this course,
this should help us understand the general concepts so
that when you work with these types of datasets in real life,
it is familiar to you.
For the actual synthetic dataset,
I created it with 100,000 records with 7,800 encounters and 1,000 patients.
I use a normal distribution for randomly selecting
values and made sure that key fields like,
principal diagnosis code are duplicated across encounter lines.
I'm just showing you in case you want and play around
with creating different sized data sets.
It's not important for you to know the step-by-step here.
This was done in a quick ad hoc fashion to enable us to use
a dataset that is similar to what I've worked on in the real world.
Now that we know a little bit about the synthetic dataset that we will be using,
we can move on to lesson activity of converting from line to encounter level.
So let's load up the synthetic dataset and take a quick look at a random encounter.
For ID 100, you can see that is all for the same patient 585 and that
the principle diagnosis code is 71465 and is repeated across the lines.
The key thing to note is that the each row is different for the code set columns,
medication, lab code, and procedure code.
Hopefully, this illustrates how this encounter dataset is denormalized at the line level.
Now we can do the actual data transformation
to convert this dataset to the encounter level.
First, in this code block,
I create a column lists for the fields we're using to group,
and then the fields not included in the grouping.
Then in this code block,
I just use the pandas group by method in
aggregate function to build this dataset and only include values that are not null.
For real life data sets,
I might use a big data SQL engine,
or Spark to convert and prepare a dataset.
But the general aggregation logic would be similar.
So now that we've transformed this data,
we can look at this output for what we created with an encounter level dataset.
Let's just take a look at five records here.
If we see this output here,
we can take this first patient_ID 186,
and just select the first encounter for that patient.
We will use this encounter to compare the output from when we
created the encounter level dataset to the input of the line level dataset.
I'll show you in a moment what that looks like.
So here's a look at the line level for encounter_id_1.
You can see encounter_id_1 being
duplicated and the patient_ID being duplicated across the rows,
as well as the principle diagnosis code.
However, as we learned earlier,
the procedure code, medication code,
lab codes will be distinct across the rows or could be distinct depending on the case.
So this is the source of where things are different
across the rows and this is the line level view.
Then, let's take a look of how this is aggregated up into that encounter level view.
It's basically all of this information being squashed
and aggregated up together into array here,
and here, and here.
So that is an example of how you take
a line level dataset and convert it to an encounter level dataset.